design/design.md, before:

## Design Decisions:
One large design change we made was regarding the data schema in Firestore. Based off of some feedback from the previous lab PR, we found it easier to have a top-level "Lists" collection, where each document within has a userId, listId, and listName, as well as a "Items" subcollection that contains the items within that list. Previously, we had a top-level "Users" collection with "Items" subcollection, but making changes to lists and having multiple lists was more cumbersome. This new structure provides more flexibility and also prepares us for next week's Authentication/Authorization lab where users can share lists with each other. It took some work to refactor our code to work with the new schema, but in the end, it was worth it.

For accessbility, the first thing we focused on was making sure our color scheme has enough contrast to allow users with color blindness to read everything. For the most part, we found that our app was already fine-- the only thing that needed a change was the edit button for each list item, which we made slightly darker to provide more contrast. Next, the text size for task names, buttons, and the header/footer was adjusted to be responsive based on the current screen size. After this change, the individual tasks, buttons, and title are much easier to read on larger screens. The size of the header and footer were also changed to be larger and more prominent when the screen reaches a certain width: This ensures that important buttons in the footer/header are still just as significant in the UI when the screen is large. Screen-reader functionality was added by adding a label to each important component of the app. Users who use a screenreader can now use keyboard controls to tab through, control, and listen to a description of each button, task, and dropdown. Any modals (such as the add/edit task modal) that appear on screen "trap" the user's focus inside of them, so that it's easy for blind users to navigate these submenus with only a keyboard. Overall, with our new responsive accessibility changes made, the app feels and looks a lot better on all screen sizes. Furthermore, regarding screen reader accessibility, we made sure to add various "aria-label", "aria-labelledby", and "aria-describedby" attributes wherever necessary. For example, all icon buttons without text received an "aria-label" so that vision-impaired users can use a screenreader and hear the iccon button's functionality read out. Icon buttons like the trash can to delete items/lists and pencil to edit items/lists were given appropraite aria labels. Additionally, dropdowns and their items were also given labels so that screenreader users know what their options are and what is currently selected/not selected. Finally, modals and their respective inputs and dropdowns were given titles, descriptions, and dialogue roles in order to convey to screenreader users what the modal is doing and its significance as a popup.

![](final.png)

Keyboard video link:

Screenreader video link:


## Alternative Designs:
As mentioned above, one alternative design (technically our last lab's final design) we had was having the data schema with a top-level "Users" collection with "Items" subcollection. To implement multiple lists, each user would have to have multiple subcollections. With Firestore, there wasn't an easy way to query all subcollections of a document, so for each user document, we had an array that stored the names of its lists/subcollections. This meant that every time we wanted to edit a list name, we would have to change data in two places, the subcollection and the user document array. By changing over to the top-level "Lists" collection, we decoupled this dependency between two entities so we only had to change one place.

## User Testing:
For user testing, we again followed the guidelines stated in the readings. For each user, we specifically had them test all three modes of accessibility: Once with a mouse/keyboard, once with just keyboard controls, and once with keyboard controls + the screenreader.

User 1: Our first user gave us relatively positive feedback about our new accessibility options. They tested the webapp on a responsive screen in Chrome, and noted that the changes in text and element size made the app very easy to read. One key improvement this user pointed out was that, while the task text and button sizes get bigger, the header and footer seem too static by comparison. They pointed out that the header/footer text sizes should also be made responsive to make the look of the app feel more consistent. This is an improvement that we carried into our final version: Now, using a larger screen causes the header/footer textsize to increase. Similar to feedback from our last lab, this user also mentioned that the grouping of buttons in the header and footer (to add tasks/lists, and undo previous actions) made intuitive sense to them, and overall worked how they expected. They also noted that the keyboard controls (using tab/arrowkeys to navigate) worked as intended for each item. Finally, the biggest issue this user pointed out was with the screenreader: They noticed that the To-Do list and sort dropdowns would not close correctly after selecting an option. Due to React's rerender, the screenreader gets "stuck" in place after an option is selected, preventing them from navigating until the user presses "Tab" again to return to the top of the page. Unfortunately, we weren't able to figure out a fix for this yet, since it seems to be caused by React's re-render which we can't do anything about. However, this is something we've noted down to potentially find a fix for in the future.

User 2: The second user also contributed by giving us some valuable feedback about the responsiveness of the webapp. The user first noted that the three buttons in the top-right group (for editing, adding, and deleting lists) should be condensed into a hamburger/kebab icon when the screen gets too small. While this change makes sense, we ultimately decided not to add this since the three buttons already don't take up much space-- thus, the screen would have to get EXTREMELY small in order for the hamburger/kebab to be useful. However, we noted this down to potentially make this change if we add more buttons to the header in the future. They also noted that the overall header (the "To-Do:" in the top left corner) should be made slightly bigger for visibility, which we implemented right away. Lastly, this user also pointed out a visual bug with the list dropdown: When a list with a very long name is added, the header elements get displaced and look like a mess. We immediately fixed this by adding a "max-width" property to the list dropdown to ensure that, past a certain length, the list name would be truncated with an ellipsis. When testing the other accessibility modes (keyboard and screenreader), they mentioned that everything seems to be working as intended.

## Challenges:
Overall, designing for accessibility has been a new experience for both of us. We are used to simply creating applications that do not think about things like smaller/larger screen sizes and impaired users. Thus, there was a bit of a learning curve and we had to review lecture videos, in-class exercises, and outside documentation to get a firm grasp on what to do. However, after a bit of tinkering, we were able to do well. Additionally, it took time to transfer over to our new data schema. At first, some functionality was broken, but then we went through individual functions within the app and fixed them to conform to the new data schema.

## Parts Of Design We Are Proud Of:
Overall, we are proud of all of the accessibility features we have added. As mentioned before, this type of accesibility programming is very new to us, but it was great to gain exposure to it. We believe this will be very useful when we are creating our own applications or working in the industry, since technology is always evolving to become more accessible to all.

Commit message:

Add video demo links to design.md

design/design.md, after:

## VIDEO DEMO LINKS:

Demo 1 - Screen Reader demonstration [Link](https://youtu.be/1kzSXAjBmlw)

Demo 2 - Keyboard Navigation demonstration [Link](https://youtu.be/J86ilS-cDME)

See the descriptions of each video for specific keypresses.

## Design Decisions:
One large design change we made was regarding the data schema in Firestore. Based off of some feedback from the previous lab PR, we found it easier to have a top-level "Lists" collection, where each document within has a userId, listId, and listName, as well as a "Items" subcollection that contains the items within that list. Previously, we had a top-level "Users" collection with "Items" subcollection, but making changes to lists and having multiple lists was more cumbersome. This new structure provides more flexibility and also prepares us for next week's Authentication/Authorization lab where users can share lists with each other. It took some work to refactor our code to work with the new schema, but in the end, it was worth it.

For accessbility, the first thing we focused on was making sure our color scheme has enough contrast to allow users with color blindness to read everything. For the most part, we found that our app was already fine-- the only thing that needed a change was the edit button for each list item, which we made slightly darker to provide more contrast. Next, the text size for task names, buttons, and the header/footer was adjusted to be responsive based on the current screen size. After this change, the individual tasks, buttons, and title are much easier to read on larger screens. The size of the header and footer were also changed to be larger and more prominent when the screen reaches a certain width: This ensures that important buttons in the footer/header are still just as significant in the UI when the screen is large. Screen-reader functionality was added by adding a label to each important component of the app. Users who use a screenreader can now use keyboard controls to tab through, control, and listen to a description of each button, task, and dropdown. Any modals (such as the add/edit task modal) that appear on screen "trap" the user's focus inside of them, so that it's easy for blind users to navigate these submenus with only a keyboard. Overall, with our new responsive accessibility changes made, the app feels and looks a lot better on all screen sizes. Furthermore, regarding screen reader accessibility, we made sure to add various "aria-label", "aria-labelledby", and "aria-describedby" attributes wherever necessary. For example, all icon buttons without text received an "aria-label" so that vision-impaired users can use a screenreader and hear the iccon button's functionality read out. Icon buttons like the trash can to delete items/lists and pencil to edit items/lists were given appropraite aria labels. Additionally, dropdowns and their items were also given labels so that screenreader users know what their options are and what is currently selected/not selected. Finally, modals and their respective inputs and dropdowns were given titles, descriptions, and dialogue roles in order to convey to screenreader users what the modal is doing and its significance as a popup.

![](final.png)

Keyboard video link:

Screenreader video link:


## Alternative Designs:
As mentioned above, one alternative design (technically our last lab's final design) we had was having the data schema with a top-level "Users" collection with "Items" subcollection. To implement multiple lists, each user would have to have multiple subcollections. With Firestore, there wasn't an easy way to query all subcollections of a document, so for each user document, we had an array that stored the names of its lists/subcollections. This meant that every time we wanted to edit a list name, we would have to change data in two places, the subcollection and the user document array. By changing over to the top-level "Lists" collection, we decoupled this dependency between two entities so we only had to change one place.

## User Testing:
For user testing, we again followed the guidelines stated in the readings. For each user, we specifically had them test all three modes of accessibility: Once with a mouse/keyboard, once with just keyboard controls, and once with keyboard controls + the screenreader.

User 1: Our first user gave us relatively positive feedback about our new accessibility options. They tested the webapp on a responsive screen in Chrome, and noted that the changes in text and element size made the app very easy to read. One key improvement this user pointed out was that, while the task text and button sizes get bigger, the header and footer seem too static by comparison. They pointed out that the header/footer text sizes should also be made responsive to make the look of the app feel more consistent. This is an improvement that we carried into our final version: Now, using a larger screen causes the header/footer textsize to increase. Similar to feedback from our last lab, this user also mentioned that the grouping of buttons in the header and footer (to add tasks/lists, and undo previous actions) made intuitive sense to them, and overall worked how they expected. They also noted that the keyboard controls (using tab/arrowkeys to navigate) worked as intended for each item. Finally, the biggest issue this user pointed out was with the screenreader: They noticed that the To-Do list and sort dropdowns would not close correctly after selecting an option. Due to React's rerender, the screenreader gets "stuck" in place after an option is selected, preventing them from navigating until the user presses "Tab" again to return to the top of the page. Unfortunately, we weren't able to figure out a fix for this yet, since it seems to be caused by React's re-render which we can't do anything about. However, this is something we've noted down to potentially find a fix for in the future.

User 2: The second user also contributed by giving us some valuable feedback about the responsiveness of the webapp. The user first noted that the three buttons in the top-right group (for editing, adding, and deleting lists) should be condensed into a hamburger/kebab icon when the screen gets too small. While this change makes sense, we ultimately decided not to add this since the three buttons already don't take up much space-- thus, the screen would have to get EXTREMELY small in order for the hamburger/kebab to be useful. However, we noted this down to potentially make this change if we add more buttons to the header in the future. They also noted that the overall header (the "To-Do:" in the top left corner) should be made slightly bigger for visibility, which we implemented right away. Lastly, this user also pointed out a visual bug with the list dropdown: When a list with a very long name is added, the header elements get displaced and look like a mess. We immediately fixed this by adding a "max-width" property to the list dropdown to ensure that, past a certain length, the list name would be truncated with an ellipsis. When testing the other accessibility modes (keyboard and screenreader), they mentioned that everything seems to be working as intended.

## Challenges:
Overall, designing for accessibility has been a new experience for both of us. We are used to simply creating applications that do not think about things like smaller/larger screen sizes and impaired users. Thus, there was a bit of a learning curve and we had to review lecture videos, in-class exercises, and outside documentation to get a firm grasp on what to do. However, after a bit of tinkering, we were able to do well. Additionally, it took time to transfer over to our new data schema. At first, some functionality was broken, but then we went through individual functions within the app and fixed them to conform to the new data schema.

## Parts Of Design We Are Proud Of:
Overall, we are proud of all of the accessibility features we have added. As mentioned before, this type of accesibility programming is very new to us, but it was great to gain exposure to it. We believe this will be very useful when we are creating our own applications or working in the industry, since technology is always evolving to become more accessible to all.
